docs/cli/config.md, before:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw config` (get/set/unset config values)"
read_when:
  - You want to read or edit config non-interactively
title: "config"
---

# `openclaw config`

Config helpers: get/set/unset values by path. Run without a subcommand to open
the configure wizard (same as `openclaw configure`).

## Examples

```bash
openclaw config get browser.executablePath
openclaw config set browser.executablePath "/usr/bin/google-chrome"
openclaw config set agents.defaults.heartbeat.every "2h"
openclaw config set agents.list[0].tools.exec.node "node-id-or-name"
openclaw config unset tools.web.search.apiKey
```

## Paths

Paths use dot or bracket notation:

```bash
openclaw config get agents.defaults.workspace
openclaw config get agents.list[0].id
```

Use the agent list index to target a specific agent:

```bash
openclaw config get agents.list
openclaw config set agents.list[1].tools.exec.node "node-id-or-name"
```

## Values

Values are parsed as JSON5 when possible; otherwise they are treated as strings.
Use `--strict-json` to require JSON5 parsing. `--json` remains supported as a legacy alias.

```bash
openclaw config set agents.defaults.heartbeat.every "0m"
openclaw config set gateway.port 19001 --strict-json
openclaw config set channels.whatsapp.groups '["*"]' --strict-json
```

Restart the gateway after edits.

Commit message:

CLI: add config path subcommand to print active config file path (#26256)
Merged via squash.

Prepared head SHA: b11c593a34c5730f4244c054e1d1ab536953b0ef
Co-authored-by: cyb1278588254 <48212932+cyb1278588254@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: gumadeiras <5599352+gumadeiras@users.noreply.github.com>
Reviewed-by: @gumadeiras

docs/cli/config.md, after:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw config` (get/set/unset values and config file path)"
read_when:
  - You want to read or edit config non-interactively
title: "config"
---

# `openclaw config`

Config helpers: get/set/unset values by path and print the active config file.
Run without a subcommand to open
the configure wizard (same as `openclaw configure`).

## Examples

```bash
openclaw config file
openclaw config get browser.executablePath
openclaw config set browser.executablePath "/usr/bin/google-chrome"
openclaw config set agents.defaults.heartbeat.every "2h"
openclaw config set agents.list[0].tools.exec.node "node-id-or-name"
openclaw config unset tools.web.search.apiKey
```

## Paths

Paths use dot or bracket notation:

```bash
openclaw config get agents.defaults.workspace
openclaw config get agents.list[0].id
```

Use the agent list index to target a specific agent:

```bash
openclaw config get agents.list
openclaw config set agents.list[1].tools.exec.node "node-id-or-name"
```

## Values

Values are parsed as JSON5 when possible; otherwise they are treated as strings.
Use `--strict-json` to require JSON5 parsing. `--json` remains supported as a legacy alias.

```bash
openclaw config set agents.defaults.heartbeat.every "0m"
openclaw config set gateway.port 19001 --strict-json
openclaw config set channels.whatsapp.groups '["*"]' --strict-json
```

## Subcommands

- `config file`: Print the active config file path (resolved from `OPENCLAW_CONFIG_PATH` or default location).

Restart the gateway after edits.
